
VSPACE
++++++

SUMMARY
-------
Changes the maximum size and shape of plots.

SYNTAX
------

  ``VSPACE FULL|v``

INPUT
-----
   :FULL:  Use full viewspace.  This is the largest possible screen or
       window size.
    
   :v:  Force the viewspace to have a y:x aspect ratio of v.  The largest
       possible area with this aspect ratio becomes the viewspace.
    
DEFAULT VALUES
--------------

  ``VSPACE FULL``

DESCRIPTION
-----------
  The viewspace represents that portion of the viewing surface on which
  plots can be drawn.  There is a large variation in viewspace shapes and sizes
  between different graphics devices:

   1. Although differing greatly in size, many graphics terminals
      have an aspect ratio of 0.75.
      Some terminals, however, have different aspect ratios.
      The HP 26xx family of terminals have an aspect ratio of 0.5.
      The Tektronix 4025 terminals can have a wide range of aspect ratios,
      depending upon how many lines on the screen are assigned to the
      alphanumeric display and how many to the graphic display.

   2. The SAC Graphics File (SGF) has an aspect ratio of 0.75
      This is the approximate ratio of a standard sheet of 8.5 by 11 paper.

   3. The graphics windows created by the XWINDOWS or SUNWINDOWS device
      can have any aspect ratio you wish.

  This variation among graphics devices can be a problem if you are need
  complete control over the size and shape of a plot.  This command gives you
  control over the shape of a plot by letting you select a fixed aspect ratio.
  (SAC does not currently give you much control over the size.) The default is
  to plot to the full viewspace.  If you do select a fixed aspect ratio, then
  the viewspace becomes the largest enclosed area on the device with that
  aspect ratio.

  This command is useful when you are creating a figure on an interactive
  device using PLOTC_ that you eventually want to send to the SGF_ device.  You
  should set the aspect ratio to 0.75 before doing any plotting.  This will
  ensure that the figure will have the same in the SGF_ file as it is does on
  the interactive device.  Another use is when you want a square viewspace
  independent of the graphics device. This is easily done by requesting an
  aspect ratio of 1.0.

LATEST REVISION
---------------
  May 15, 1987 (Version 10.2)

